# Using Ada Keystore Tool

The `akt` tool is the command line tool that manages the wallet.
It provides the following commands:

* `create`:   create the keystore
* `edit`:     edit the value with an external editor
* `get`:      get a value from the keystore
* `help`:     print some help
* `list`:     list values of the keystore
* `remove`:   remove values from the keystore
* `otp`:      generate a one time password or manage OATH secrets
* `set`:      insert or update a value in the keystore

To create the secure file, use the following command and enter
your secure password (it is recommended to use a long and complex password):

```
   akt create secure.akt
```

At this step, the secure file is created and it can only be opened
by providing the password you entered.  To add something, use:

```
   akt set secure.akt bank.password 012345
```

To store a file, use the following command:
```
   akt store secure.akt contract.doc
```

If you want to retrieve a value, you can use one of:
```
   akt get secure.akt bank.password
   akt extract secure.akt contract.doc
```

You can also use the `akt` command together with the `tar` command
to create secure backups.  You can create the compressed tar file,
pipe the result to the `akt` command to store the content in the wallet.

```
   tar czf - dir-to-backup | akt store secure.akt -- backup.tar.gz
```

To extract the backup you can use the `extract` command and feed the
result to the `tar` command as follows:

```
   akt extract secure.akt -- backup.tar.gz | tar xzf -
```

## Storing and using one-time password

The `akt` tool integrates a support to manage Open Authentication (OATH) standards for
generating one-time password (OTP) codes.  The OTP code is similar to a password and often
asked after a password validation in two-factor (2FA) authentications.  `akt` supports
the time-based one-time password (TOTP) algorithm as described in RFC 6238.  This support
is provided by the `otp` command.

After creating your secure keystore and protecting it either with a password or your GPG key,
you can register the `otpauth` URI generated by your provider (for example GitHub).  The simpler
registration form is to get the `otpauth` URI from the provider and register it with the command:

```
   akt otp secure.akt 'otpauth://totp/GitHub:user?secret=XXXXXXX&issuer=GitHub'
```

You can also use the `--interactive` option to help you enter the different fields that compose
the `otpauth` URI.  Once the `otpauth` URI is registered, you can ask a new code by using the
same `otp` command and giving the account name:

```
   akt otp secure.akt GitHub:user
```

